## Disclaimer

The content of this book and its associated content, including but not limited to websites, emails, newsletters, and videos (herein referred to as "Content"), is published in the United States of America and persons who access it agree to do so in accordance with applicable U.S. law.

The Content is published for informational purposes only.  Nothing in the Content constitutes investment advice, performance data, or any recommendation any security, portfolio of securities, investment product, transaction or investment strategy is suitable for any specific person.  You should not treat any part of the Content as a specific inducement to make a particular investment, purchase or sell any security or asset, or follow a particular strategy. The Content is based upon information deemed reliable, but there are warranties of any kind, express or implied, as to its completeness or accuracy.  No party is not under any obligation to update or correct the Content or any information provided.  The Content is subject to change without notice. 

Past performance is not indicative of future results.  No party guarantees any specific outcome or profit. You should be aware of the real risk of loss in following any strategy or investment discussed in the Content. Strategies or investments discussed may fluctuate in price or value. Investors may get back less than invested. Investments or strategies mentioned on the Content may not be suitable for you. This material does not take into account your particular investment objectives, financial situation or needs and is not intended as recommendations appropriate for you. You must make an independent decision regarding investments or strategies mentioned in the Content.  Before acting on the Content, you should consider whether it is suitable for your particular circumstances and strongly consider seeking advice from your own financial or investment adviser.

Some of the links in the Content are affiliate links, meaning, at no additional cost to you, the authors of the Content may earn a commission if you click through and make a purchase and/or subscribe.  This has not influenced the Content as it is written.